In this lesson, we're going to learn all about JSON.
JSON is a popular way of representing data and Shopify themes,
the way you represent all of your data and your Shopify theme is through JSON files.
We saw in the last video we've got language file here,
which is stored in JSON.
We can also edit that through the theme language editor,
which we also saw in the last video.
This is quite basic.
We have access to the keys and attributes within that object,
and we can just edit this directly through here,
or we can edit it on the actual data file itself.
What I want to discuss more in depth in this lesson is JSON Schemas.
If I click out to that and I go into settings_schema,
we can see the schema for our entire website.
Now, I know we haven't looked at this just yet,
but we have of course,
looked at schemas briefly as it relates to individual sections.
Right here, the schema that we see here is very
similar to how it operates here in our settings_schema.JSON.
If you want to learn more about JSON itself,
stands for JavaScript Object Notation.
It's a way of representing data that looks
similar to how you would represent data in JavaScript,
but it's not exactly the same.
Some major differences include having double quotes around the property names.
But if you want to learn more about JSON,
a quick Google search,
it's just J-S-O-N, and you have a world of information open up to you about JSON.
It's quite simple.
It's not summing to study
a whole course on unless you really want to get in depth with it.
But for our purposes,
all we need to understand in
JSON schema we've got arrays just like we would in JavaScript,
and then an object is represented by these curly brackets.
So as we saw with the language file,
this is the object overall.
Then inside this object we can target the general object.
Then when we're inside the general object,
we can grab the "404" object and then grab attributes or nested objects within that.
We saw that coming into our output here.
Going into the locales,
picking out the general object,
going into the nested "404" object and grabbing the title of that.
All right, so that's a little bit on JSON and the syntax behind it.
But let's talk more about schemas and how it all works in Shopify.
We saw the schema as it relates to specific sections in previous videos.
But I want to show you settings_schema.JSON.
If we go back to our customizer and we go on any page,
you see we've got sections in the first tab here.
We can see our sections as we saw before,
and any schemas within those sections will generate these inputs.
But there's also this other menu called theme settings.
Here we can place groups of settings that we can access throughout our theme.
There are some limitations though.
One of the features of a settings in sections is that we can have blocks
which we'll see very soon in the overall theme settings.
We can't do blocks.
That's one limitation, but otherwise they work pretty much the same.
Let's go in and show you an example.
After this object, I'm going to create a new object and give this a name of,
let's just say, general styles.
This is like how you would define a section as well.
Then just like we would in a sections schema,
we define a settings array.
Inside this settings array,
we can create any types of inputs that we want.
For this video, I've already loaded up the two areas of
the Shopify documentation that will help you with creating these JSON Schemas.
The first one is: @themes/development/sections.
The title is themed sections.
This one is handy for learning about how to structure your schema.
You've got the different tags we saw presets in an earlier video.
We will also learn about blocks here today as well.
Over here in configuring theme settings,
it's frustrating that they put it in a separate page.
But this is the page where you'll learn about all the different input settings,
so text, text area,
image picker, radio, select checkbox range.
Those are the basic ones and then they've got
some advanced ones down here, I believe, yes.
We can create inputs for color, fonts, collections,
products, blogs, pages, links,
lists, URLs, lots of different stuff.
If you want to see if there is something that you can make a user input,
chances are it's going to be in here.
Going back to here,
we need to create a setting.
What I'm going to do just for demonstration purposes is create
a setting for the color of links. Let's just say.
I'm going to use the color picker.
Let's just copy the example.
I'll go into here and replace my empty object with the object from the documentation.
The type is already set is going to be color.
We just need to give that an ID.
I'm going to call this link color,
and the label is what gets shown to the user.
I'm going to call it link color.
I'm using the American spelling just to be consistent and the default value,
we'll just say blue.
This one here info allows us to put in an extra little bit of text.
I don't think that it's necessary in this instance,
but just to show you what it does for when you do need it,
I'm going to write a description here.
This is for the link color.
If I save that,
you can see we've got an error.
Setting with link color default must be a CSS color.
We can't use blue,
it has to be a HEX value,
so let me just do black. Try that.
Must be a CSS color.
There we go. Not the best at running hex codes.
I usually just look them up.
All right, but now we've got this hex code which represents black.
If we go into our customizer now and refresh the page everything looks the same,
but we can go in here.
Now we've got this section for general styles.
Click on that, and we have link color.
The default value has been set to #000 and it's filled in the other zeros.
We can go in, change this to that blue color and hit "save."
Now just like we did with the settings in the section schema,
this isn't going to do anything unless we actually reference that value.
That is what, of course the ID is for.
Let's go ahead and make all the links in our theme according to this link color.
Now, where we should put a style that's going to be on
every page of our theme is in our global CSS file.
But what we want to do is reference liquid in this instance because we're going to
need to access the settings object in liquid in order to access this value.
One feature of Shopify themes that you may not realize
is that you can use liquid on your CSS files as well.
What I'm going to do is change this file name and add.liquid to the end of it.
Then, I'll hit ''Done''.
Now it's going to have a ridiculously long extension, but, oh, well.
Now what I'm going to do is target all links using CSS,
and change the color attribute based off what is set in here.
As I just mentioned,
the way to do that is through the global settings object.
I can create an output tag,
access my settings object,
and then I'm going to go into the setting with the ID of link color.
I'm going to put in link color here,
and then I'm going to close it with a semicolon.
Now, we might actually have to change the name of this inner theme.liquid,
but let's go and have a look and see if that works now.
I'm going to bring up the DevTools.
There's no errors in the console.
Let's go down to where we bring in the link.
If I open the CSS file,
open in a new tab,
you'll see that we have our CSS,
but instead of the liquid tag,
which remember gets all generated on the server side,
we have the actual output.
Just like we calculate liquid on the back end with all of these,
and it just spits out HTML and CSS,
we've got the same thing happening here.
We can put a.liquid at the end of this,
then Shopify those to pause any liquid within here.
Then by the time it gets to the front end,
as we saw, it is just a css.scss file.
There's no liquid extension,
and it calculates all of the liquid and puts in the actual value. Very cool.
So we can programmatically affect our style sheet.
I'm going to go back into the customizer here and let's
see if we can get our link tags changing.
I'm going to refresh the page to make sure that everything's current.
Go into general styles,
and change this to something really obvious, like red.
I'm going to hit ''Save'',
and right now it isn't updating.
Let's have a look inside theme,
oh, wait. Here we go.
Now we can see that by default,
all the links are red,
because we just set that right here in our general settings.
If we refresh the customizer,
we should get the same result here as well.
Maybe it's caching a little bit.
Not sure why it is not affecting in the customizer,
but is definitely affecting it on the front end here.
That's a great example of creating theme settings and putting it in here.
This is for anything general,
link colors, heading colors,
fonts, anything like that that you want to
affect the whole theme would go in theme settings.
But most commonly, you're going to be setting settings in your section.
I'm going to just go back and change this because it doesn't look too good being red.
Hit ''Save'' on that,
and go into here and refresh the page. There we go.
Now we've got the color that we set.
Cool. All right.
Now let's go into one of our sections and let's look at the featured-collection section.
The first thing we want to do is allow the user to actually choose
the collection that gets featured rather than hard coding it in.
I'm going to go in my settings here, open that up.
As always, I'm going to go in and check what inputs I have available.
Remember we saw one for collection.
I'm going to click on that one.
Here we've got an example which I can just copy word for word.
I'm doing this fast,
because I don't want to get caught up on the theory.
But if you want to read about what we're doing here,
it's all on the documentation.
Go back, replace our empty object here with the attributes that we need to edit.
The type is already set for us.
I'm going to change the ID to collection because it just makes the most sense.
Call the label collection,
and we really don't need an info line here,
because it's quite simple.
Then up here, we can set the collection to,
instead of featured-collection, we can actually reference the settings.
So I'm going to grab this section object,
go into its settings and find collection.
Then I am going to save.
Now, this will break it because we don't have
a default set that then we can easily go and update it.
If I go into the homepage where this featured collection section is,
it says no matches because we haven't actually inserted anything.
Now the content's not showing up.
Let's have a look. What have we done wrong here?
Everything's looking fine.
Maybe we forgot to update or refresh our customizer.
Let's do that right now.
We should still get no matches because we haven't set a collection yet.
But now we can see that collection is now an input.
Now we can, as the user,
have this lovely user interface to select a collection that we want to bring in here.
Then as we select it,
it should be used by our section.
So I'm going to hit ''Save'' and we've still got an issue.
Let me go and check on the front end if it's erroring as well.
No matches. So let's go back again, have a look.
What I think we're experiencing here is an issue I find with Shopify themes,
where calling a resource object gives us its name,
but not the object itself.
Just to confirm this,
I'm going to create
an output tag and see if we just get the collection name if I put our collection.
I suspect that this will definitely be the case.
If I refresh the page,
you can see the handle of the collection shows up.
If we were actually accessing the collection object,
we would get a different result.
This is a frustrating thing within Shopify.
You would think that if we linked a collection here and then we code it,
we would get the collection object,
but instead, we get the collection handle.
The way we can get around this is by using the collections global.
I'm going to go "collections" and then I can use this dynamic value as the handle.
Maybe this looks a bit complicated, but trust me,
it's not as complicated as you might think.
This is essentially the same thing as doing featured-collection,
which is exactly what we had before.
We just replaced that handle with the handle we get from the user down here.
I'm going to hit ''Save'' and see if we get a different result.
Now you can see that we're actually getting
the collection object and we're able to loop
through the products in that collection object.
Now I'm really glad we came up against that problem
because this is something that's not particularly obvious in Shopify theme programming,
and it's something that trips me up quite a bit as well.
But from experience, I knew that
sometimes you expect an object but get something else back in Shopify.
Remember when we put this out before we got the collection handle.
Let's now put out collection and see what we get instead.
This is what we were expecting to get when we
put out this object or what we thought was an object.
If we go back and refresh the page,
we can see words come up called CollectionDrop.
Now this is special terminology in liquid,
which basically says this is the collection object.
So if it was an empty object,
it would say empty drop.
If it was a product object,
it would say product drop.
Unfortunately, we can't output the whole object as we would maybe in JavaScript.
It just tells us that this is a collection object.
So now we know because before,
remember we took the collection
here from our section settings and we outputted that as well.
If I break those up with a break tag,
you can see that the first one is
the handle of the collection and the second one is the actual collection object.
Okay, I probably went too much off on a tangent there,
but something that really trip you up in Shopify theme programming and something
I've learned the hard way is when you select resources in your customizer,
sometimes you just get the handle and not the actual object.
At that point, you have to actually use a global,
reference the handle, and then pick it off the actual global object.
So that's what we've done here,
and we've got it working.
So now the user can select
what collection gets shown in that featured collection section.
Okay. If I refresh the page here,
we should get the same result.
Yeah. So I could add any kind of other settings here.
I could show the sale price,
show wherever it's sold out on not, show vendor.
Basically customize pretty much anything about this section for these section settings.
So that's what we do right here.
Okay. Now, the final thing to cover off with
schemas is the question of where does the data actually gets stored?
Remember I said all data in Shopify is stored
in Shopify themes specifically is stored in JSO N format.
So where do we find that?
Well, all the data for your Shopify theme,
gets stored in settings_data.json,
regardless of where it's coming from,
settings_schema, or it's coming from a specific section.
So here we have schemas, and each of these.
The actual value that gets stored,
all of it goes in here.
So you can see this current object at the top,
and in our current object we have the link color stored.
Okay. So if I was to go in,
change that link color again. All right.
I want you to notice that this value here is the same as that value there.
Now, if I change it to red again,
I think this is a slightly different shade of red,
and we refresh this data file.
I want you to look at what happens to the data file.
As you can see, the value of link color has changed in the data file,
and just like we did in the language file,
we can actually change this value and it will change in the user interface as well.
This is the back-end data that is linking to the user interface.
So this will change it in the customizer and
change the value wherever it's cold in the theme.
So if you go in here, the link color is back to black because I changed it in this data.
Now this is important because whenever you're migrating
themes or copying themes or trying to merge two themes together,
you need to take care of this data file.
I'm not going to talk too much about staging because I do
have a video on YouTube about that.
Just search for Shopify theme development
on YouTube and hopefully you'll find my channel.
If I'm doing my SEO, right.
But this is something just to be aware of with your data file.
It all gets stored here,
so be very careful with the data file.
Try to avoid touching this.
But if you do need to merge data from two themes, this is how you would do it.
All right, with that side note out of the way,
I want to draw your attention to a few more things in this settings_json document,
and that is we have this section's object right here.
Now you can see all the sections that we have.
We have header, collection template,
footer and this one is referenced by its ID.
I'm not sure why it's referenced by its ID instead of its name, but regardless,
we've got a featured collection here,
and you can see in our settings,
we have a key value of collection with the featured collection handle.
So if I go in and change this to a different handle,
that would update it in the selection I have here for my featured collection.
All right, again, this is just a lovely user interface to change what's written in here.
The other thing I want you to notice is the content for index array.
It takes all the IDs of the sections that are in use and puts it in here.
So if I just remove that ID and hit "Save".
Now when we go to our "Homepage",
that section that the ID referenced is now missing from our Homepage.
Okay. But we can always add it back in.
Add in the featured collection.
Choose a collection that we want to feature.
I've just called mine featured collection.
Save that again, and if we refresh the data file,
you'll see that that data file in the content for index array is back in there.
Okay. So settings_data.json stores
all the data that's generated from all your schemas in the one place.
There is of course, your locales photo,
but this is all just for locales.
This is separate to schemas, okay?
All of the settings that you set up in your settings_schema.json,
and the schemas within your individual sections.
All of those selections,
the selection itself goes into this file right here,
settings_data.json, and that is basically for JSON schemas.
You've seen how to add a setting on your overall theme settings.
So we saw that here,
and we've seen another example of inserting a particular setting into a section right
here by allowing the user to choose what collection gets to be featured.
Okay? Also, just to recap,
we learned about a little bit of a gotcha in Shopify Liquid.
If you do select a resource like a collection,
the object value will just be a handle,
not the object itself.
So we still need to look that up using a global object like collections,
like all products, all of the global objects you can find right here in the blog post.
See how, if I scroll down to "Collections".
This one just shows you how you can loop through collections,
but we access a particular collection via its handle.
You can do the same with the old products object.
You can access a product via
its specific handle and then that becomes the product object.
Okay. So we should be pretty clear on JSON Schemas.
Remember, you're probably not going to know off by heart what settings to put in here.
So make sure that you reference the documentation.
This page has all the different input settings that you can put in there.
On this page, theme sections,
you can learn about stuff like presets and blocks.
Blocks is something we're going to learn about in the next video
where we actually create our own section.
So I'm looking forward to that video.
I will see you in the next one.